# (Loan Data by Prosper)
## by (Unwana Ita)


## Dataset

>This dataset contains 113,937 loans records with 81 variables on each loan, including loan amount, borrower rate (or interest rate), current loan status, borrower income, and many others. In this investigation, I wanted to look at the characteristics of the data to answer the following questions

What factors affect a loan’s outcome status?
What affects the borrower’s APR or interest rate?
Are there differences between loans depending on how large the original loan amount was? 

## Summary of Findings

> I noticed that the Borrower APR is normally distributed with the peak between 15 and 20 percent in addition we have some increase in the 35percent. Prosper Scores were almost normally distributed and values 4, 6 and 8 are the most common. The highest value for original loan amount is between 3K and 5K. Also I notice increase in amount between 10K and 20K.  Most of the values are in the 3 years (36 months) terms of payment. Lender Yield is normally distributed with most of the values between 0.1 and 0.2 and we notice an increase at 0.3. Most of the loans had around 100 investors. Number of investors (for data with number of investors more than 1) is almost normally distributed around 100 and that was expected from the previous one. Most borrowers get Prosper Rating of 'C'. California (CA), Texas (TX) and New York (NY) have the 3 biggest numbers of loans originated in that period of time. People with income range of $25,000-49,999 are the ones who are taking loans most. There is a drop in 2009 in loans but it started to increase gradually and reached its peak at 2013.
## Key Insights for Presentation

> Loan Original Amount distribution is right skewed and I performed log transformation on it to interpret the visualization. I also did the log transformation to these variables: Monthly Loan Payment, Investors and Amount Delinquent. The Year 2013 had the highest loan creation. California (CA) had the biggest number of loans. Service fees were left skewed.  Some features had long-tailed, skewed distributions; these were checked on a log scale to show the hidden distribution in some areas. Strong positive correlations between Lender yield and Borrower APR. Prosper Score and Prosper Rating are also positive correlation. Credit Score upper range has also some weak positive correlation with prosper score. Negative correlation between prosper score & APR, and prosper score & Lender yield. Negative correlation between prosper ratings & APR, and prosper score & Lender yield. We see negative relationship between loan original amount and borrower APR, this means that large loans have relatively less annual interest rate from the borrower. From the BorrowerAPR  vs  LoanStatus graph we notice that Current and completed loans have lower rate than the past-due loans and have lower mean.
Borrower APR vs Employment status graph showed  that Employed people have lower IQR than those not employed. We observe that Cosmetic Procedure is given higher interest rates. From the relationship between EmploymentStatus and BorrowerAPR, People who are not employed receive high interest rate compared to the employed counterparts. The higher the income, the lower the interest rate. Original loan amount was lowest just after 2008 financial crisis, after that the amount is increasing over the year. From 2013 to 2014, amount gets really big. The loan status for the past dues has a high interest rate. Number of Defaulted loans for Self-employed people are larger than those for Not EmployedWe can see that the relationship between all variables are clear. Borrower APR and Lender yield are directly positively correlated as when the interest borrowers pays more , the lender yield will increase. The Higher the prosper score the lower the borrower API and then the lender yield will also be lower.
For each category of loan status, the lowest APR is for Employed and Full-time. Whereas highest APR is for Not employed. Most of the high BorrowerAPR are on the chargeoff, completed and current.
Past Due loans generally have higher interest rates in all employment statuses. We can see that most of the loans with higher amounts (>$20,000) are taken by people with higher prosper score (10 and above)
From the relationship between EmploymentStatus, LoanStatus and BorrowerAPR we noticed  that Employed people are diverse regarding the Loan Status and BorrowerAPR as they have sometimes high borrower rate like in chargeoff and sometimes low borrower rate like in the past dues. Employees with Full-Time and part-time tend to have lower BorrowerAPR across all loan status categories. Employees with Not-Employed & Self-Employed tend to have higher BorrowerAPR in some areas like the past dues but lower BorrowerAPR in the current and completed status. Scatter plot and Heatmap were also created to find out that ProsperScore and BorrowerAPR were negatively correlated as higher the prosper score lower will be the risk attached hence lower will be the APR and that further lowers down the yield.
